Hello, hello hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English.
The show where you can listen to
fascinating stories, and learn weird
and wonderful things about the world at
the same time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today is the
start of another mini-series on queens.
But not just any queens, we are
going to look at three remarkable
women who became queen against
all the odds, unlikely queens.
Women who fought against misogyny
and manipulative men, men who
were often far less capable than
the brave and intelligent female
subjects of this mini-series.
So, who are these women then?
First up, in today’s episode, it’s
Anne Boleyn, the unfortunate second
wife to the English King, Henry VIII.
In part two, we'll talk about her
daughter, Elizabeth I of England.
And then in part three we’ll move over to
Russia and talk about Catherine the Great.
But first, Anne Boleyn.
There are few women in British history
who have a more divisive reputation.
To some, she was a scheming,
manipulative power-hungry temptress
who bears responsibility for Britain
breaking with the Catholic Church.
To others, she was an innocent victim
of powerful men, someone whose only
crime was her beauty, wit and intellect.
And in this episode, we’ll tell her
story and you can decide for yourself.
OK then, Anne Boleyn.
On the 19th of May 1536, a young
woman was led to Tower Green, in the
grounds of the famous Tower of London.
She wore a red dress, a symbol
of martyrdom and innocence.
She spoke, her voice strong and proud:
“Good Christian people, I am come hither
to die, for according to the law, and
by the law I am judged to die, and
therefore I will speak nothing against it.
I pray God save the King … for
a gentler nor a more merciful
prince was there never.”
She knelt down on two knees.
Moments later, the French swordsman
standing behind her brought his
blade swinging through the air,
the cold steel detaching the
young woman’s head from her body.
The “king”, the merciful prince, the woman
had prayed for was no stranger to her.
Not only was this king the man
who had ordered her execution,
but he had also been her husband.
The King’s name was Henry, Henry
VIII, and the young woman’s name
was, of course, Anne Boleyn.
So, how did it come to this?
What could possibly cause a man to
order his wife’s public execution, and
how much responsibility, if any, does
Anne Boleyn have for her own fate?
Let’s start by digging
into her early life.
She was born sometime between 1500
and 1507, and by 1513, following
the tradition for noble families at
the time, she was sent overseas to
complete her education and turn her
into an eligible wife for a nobleman.
Originally, Anne was destined for Austria,
the most celebrated court in Europe, but
she was quickly moved to France, where
she became good friends with the French
Queen, who was a similar age to her.
After almost 10 years of learning
languages, mathematics, fashion, dance
and how to play the lute, and turning her
into a young woman with a wide array of
enviable talents, in 1522 Anne returned
to England, and joined the royal court.
At court, she became an attendant, a
so-called lady-in-waiting, to Henry
VIII’s first wife, Catherine of Aragon.
From the historical records that do
exist, it seems that Anne Boleyn was an
intelligent, funny and witty young woman.
Clearly, she was someone that people
liked to be around, she was not
only fun and entertaining, but she
had all of the qualities that a
nobleman might look for in a wife.
As you might expect, she turned heads at
court, there were plenty of young men who
took note of her, thinking that she was
indeed, high quality marriage material.
Initially, though, these did
not include the King, Henry.
In fact, at this time Henry had a
romantic relationship with Anne’s
older sister Mary, “the - so
called - other Boleyn girl”.
Mary, as far as historians believe, was
a very different person to her sister.
She was more beautiful, or so
the theory goes, but she wasn’t
as smart as Anne, her sister.
As such, some historians hypothesise
that Mary had quickly fallen
into bed with Henry without fully
understanding the ramifications,
the consequences, of doing so.
Anne wouldn't make the same mistake.
Or at least, she wouldn't make the
same mistake as quickly as her sister.
In any case, she had plenty of
potential suitors at court, plenty of
other men who were interested in her,
but only one really caught her eye.
His name was Henry Percy.
Going against tradition, which would
have meant that their parents and the
king had to give their permission and
blessing, Anne and Henry Percy secretly
got engaged without asking anyone.
When Henry VIII found out about
their secret engagement he ordered
his trusted statesman Thomas
Wolsey to put an end to it.
Some have speculated that Henry may
have stopped the marriage as he began
to see Anne as another potential
mistress, yet another girl at
court to add to his list of lovers.
And sometime in around 1526, after
he had lost interest in Mary Boleyn,
historians believe that Henry
started to become infatuated with,
obsessed with, her sister, Anne.
Now, was this true love, or did he simply
wanted to take her to his bed and add
her to his long list of mistresses?
He certainly declared undying
love for her, writing love letters
and sending her expensive gifts.
But Anne wasn’t like her sister, and she
wasn’t like the other women at court.
She said “no”, or at least,
“not until we’re married”.
Anne would not become the King’s lover.
As you might imagine, this came as quite
a shock to Henry; he was king of England,
he was not a man used to rejection.
And, resolving this for Henry wasn’t
quite as easy as simply marrying Anne.
In case you had forgotten, during this
very public declaration of love for Anne
and affair with Anne's sister, Henry was
still married to his first wife, Catherine
of Aragon, Anne’s boss, essentially.
But he had grown tired of this marriage.
Catherine had borne him a daughter,
Mary, but had failed to produce a son.
A son was crucial for Henry, as a
male heir would secure the future
of England and prevent future wars
over the succession – the type of
war that had won his father the crown
but left him in a dangerous position.
So, Henry needed a son, and
for that to happen, he needed a
wife capable of giving him one.
Catherine, so Henry believed,
was not the woman to do so.
So he needed a new one, a new
mother to this dreamed-of son.
Of course, back in the 16th century,
at least before 1534, England was
Catholic, you couldn’t simply divorce
someone if you’d grown tired of them.
Henry might have been the King of England,
the most powerful man in the country and
therefore one of the most powerful men
in the world, but there was something
even more powerful: the Catholic church.
For a marriage to be annulled, an
annulment, a nullification, needed
to be given by the Pope himself.
Henry wrote to the pope, protesting
that his marriage to Catherine was
wrong in the eyes of God because she
had been married to Henry’s brother.
But the pope did not accept, telling
Henry that he would be excommunicated,
he would be kicked out, of the
Catholic Church if he remarried.
Now, this process, of Henry and his
advisors trying to find theological
reasons for him to get out of
the marriage, went on for almost
a decade, with no hope in sight.
Suffice it to say that,
By the starts of start of 1533, 9 years
after Henry had first lost interest in his
wife, something important had happened.
Anne was pregnant, but the
pair still weren’t married.
Some historians think that Anne must
have got nervous about Henry losing
interest in her, others that this was
her way of speeding up the process.
In any case, pregnant she was,
there was no going back now.
The clock was ticking, and Henry
needed to move fast to make sure
that the child she was carrying
would become his legal son and heir.
And there was no doubt in
Henry’s mind that this was a son.
After all, God had cursed him for
marrying Catherine, God would now
reward him with a son from his new wife.
That was the way things worked,
at least in Henry’s mind.
But, first things first, Anne needed to
become his wife, so the pair married in
a secret ceremony in January of 1533.
There was, however, the complication
over what to do with his current wife.
He had been effectively separated
from Catherine for several years,
but she was still legally his wife in
the eyes of the law and the church.
Fortunately, in the almost decade
since Henry had grown tired of her, he
had started the process of separating
from Rome, from the Catholic Church,
and Henry was the head of his own
church by now, the Church of England.
So, in May of 1533, he ordered
his own archbishop to declare his
first marriage to be null and void.
Ta-da, Anne was his wife, Catherine
was not, so Anne could become his
queen, their child would be his heir,
everything was all lining up very nicely.
Except…it wasn’t.
On June the 1st, 1533, the
pregnant Anne was crowned queen.
She might have been happy, Henry
too might have finally been happy,
but the crowd at her coronation
was not cheering but deadly silent.
It was not only the Pope and Catherine
that were against Henry’s new marriage.
Catherine had been a popular queen,
and many people saw Anne as snatching
the King away, and what’s more, forcing
a break with Rome in the process.
As a result, Anne Boleyn was
a deeply unpopular queen.
And it would not be long before
Henry himself would become even
more disappointed than his subjects.
In September Anne gave birth to a baby.
No doubt Henry was waiting outside
with bated breath, ready to announce
the birth of a baby boy, a prince,
the heir he had craved so desperately.
This child would grow up to be an
intelligent, brave and powerful
leader, and indeed one of the
greatest monarchs in British history.
But the child was not the
son he was hoping for.
It was a baby girl.
Her name was Elizabeth, she would go on
to become Elizabeth the First, but Henry
wouldn’t know the queen she would become.
For him, her gender alone
was disappointment enough.
Henry had been so sure he was having a
son that all the proclamations, the royal
announcements, had already been written
to announce the arrival of the ‘prince’.
Two s’s had to be quickly added to all the
documents so they would correctly inform
the country of the ‘princess’ instead.
Now, Anne was still young when
Elizabeth was born, likely in her
late 20s or early 30s, so there was
plenty of time for her to try to have
another child, the illusive male heir.
But the birth of Elizabeth was only the
first of a series of disappointments.
Indeed, some historians have
suggested that, although this didn’t
seal her tragic fate, it was the
beginning of the end for Anne.
Once Henry had got what he couldn’t have,
once he had finally made Anne Boleyn his
wife, taken her to his bed, and she had
only provided him with a disappointing
daughter, his eyes began to wander.
Within a year of their marriage,
Henry had begun affairs with not
one but two of Anne’s servants.
For Henry, this was nothing new.
Indeed, he had done exactly the
same thing with Catherine when
he started his affair with Anne.
And what's more, Catherine, his
first wife, had turned a blind eye
to it, she had accepted that he was
going to have mistresses and there
was little she could do about it.
But Anne Boleyn wasn’t like Catherine.
She was furious with Henry,
and grew jealous and insecure.
She wasn't happy to be embarrassed like
that in front of everyone at Court.
Now, clearly this to us probably
seems like perfectly reasonable
behaviour - if your husband is having
a poorly-hidden affair, it seems
pretty acceptable to be angry with him.
But 500 years ago, to state the
obvious, men held the power.
A woman, even the wife of the
king, was expected to tolerate
this kind of behaviour.
Now, why wasn’t Anne?
Some have suggested that it
was because she was strong,
independent and forward-thinking.
She knew this wasn’t right, and despite
the uneven power dynamic, she did what she
could to stop her husband’s infidelity.
Others have suggested that it was
because of her strong religious
faith; when they married, Henry had
made a promise in front of God to
be loyal, so Henry shouldn’t do it.
And others have suggested that she didn’t
want to lose her position and Henry’s
favour - she knew all too well what
had happened to Henry’s first wife, and
she didn’t want to meet the same fate.
Whatever the true reason, or
combination of reasons, looking
back on it, it’s hard to deny that
it reflects well on her character.
And clearly, it reflects very badly on
Henry, who tried to justify his affairs by
blaming his wife for not giving him a son.
But shortly after, good
news, a ray of hope!
Anne was pregnant again, and in
fact it's thought that she got
pregnant again at least three times.
But in two cases she had late-term
miscarriages, she lost two babies.
And in 1536, Anne fell pregnant again.
She gave birth, miraculously, to a boy.
But tragically, the boy was
stillborn, he was dead on arrival.
Now, these miscarriages and the birth
of a stillborn baby must not only have
been hugely traumatic on an emotional
level, but they would also be the
nail in the coffin for her fortune.
Within five months she would be dead.
Henry believed that the reason for
Anne’s failure to give him a son
was because God was unhappy with
their marriage and so, much like he
had with Catherine, he decided that
this marriage too was a mistake.
It’s said that every time Anne lost a
baby, Henry loved her less and less,
and he finally convinced himself that
she was physically unable to provide him
with the son he so desperately wanted.
He kicked Anne out of Court and moved in
with his new love interest, Jane Seymour.
By now, she had truly fallen from grace.
She not only had to fight against
those who despised her because
of Henry’s divorce and saw her
responsible for the break with Rome,
but also against Henry, who was
plotting to remove all trace of her.
But how would he get rid of her?
There was no real grounds for divorce,
so he had to try something more sneaky.
And it’s here that I need to introduce
you to another character, a minister
of Henry’s called Thomas Cromwell.
He was more than a minister, really,
he was Lord Chancellor, a man Henry
relied on to do his dirty work.
Cromwell had been an old enemy of
Anne's several years beforehand,
as they had clashed over what
to do with the money from the
monasteries that Henry had dissolved.
In another episode that reflects well
on Anne, she had suggested that the
money go to the poor, and Cromwell
had suggested that it go to the King.
She also disagreed with Cromwell’s
foreign policy and she wanted to
create peace with France, which
was the opposite of his plans.
Henry asked Cromwell to try to find
some kind of crime that he could charge
his wife with, and Cromwell, being
both cunning and ruthless, got to work.
He instructed his network of spies to
find anything incriminating about Anne
that he could use to bring her down.
It did not take long to
gather some information.
Apparently, someone had overheard
Anne speaking in a way that
hinted at the king’s death.
Reportedly, she had imagined herself with
another man if Henry happened to die.
And this was highly illegal, it was
a criminal offence to speak of, to
even think of, the king’s death.
As a result, Cromwell arrested
Anne’s musician and brought
him in for questioning.
Except it wasn’t
questioning, it was torture.
Cromwell accused the musician
of having sex with Anne and
tortured him until he confessed.
Cromwell then asked him to
give him names of other men
who had had affairs with Anne.
He even accused Anne of plotting
Henry’s death with those men.
Exhausted and in agony, the tortured
musician gave Cromwell a list of men
who had reportedly slept with Anne.
All five of these men, which even
included her own brother George, just so
happened to be serious political enemies
of Cromwell’s, which certainly suggests
that Cromwell used this as an opportunity
to advance his own political interests.
Now, armed with this information,
Cromwell began to put together
evidence that he could use at a trial.
This evidence was weak at best, it made
little sense, and historians now believe
it was all a conspiracy, a set-up to
provide an excuse to get rid of Anne.
But 500 years ago, justice consisted
of whatever the King wanted, really.
Anne was arrested on the 2nd of May
1536 and taken to the Tower of London.
The charges against her were for
adultery, incest and treason.
Although she put up an admirable
battle, it was a show-trial in effect,
there was no way she would win.
The jury, which even included
her own uncle, could never go
against the wishes of the king.
Unsurprisingly, Anne was found
guilty of all charges, and she
was sentenced to death, along with
all the men who were also accused.
She was distraught and terrified.
So terrified that she asked to be
executed with a sword, rather than
an axe, because she was afraid
the axe would not be quick enough.
Henry did grant her this one wish.
An expert executioner was
brought over from France.
As you heard at the start of
the episode, the Frenchman was
accurate, and the sword was quick.
He picked up her head and declared
‘God save the king!’ before the
crowd reportedly gasped in horror
as Anne’s eyes were still moving.
It was a truly gruesome and inglorious
end for a woman who Henry had once
claimed to have been so in love with, so
much so that he had caused the biggest
religious split in his country’s history.
And without anyone left to defend
her reputation after her execution,
she increasingly was portrayed and
described as an evil, manipulative woman.
People began to spread rumours
that Anne had been a witch, and one
even claimed that she had eleven
fingers and was covered in warts.
People proposed that she had used spells
and magic to get Henry to fall so deeply
in love with her, and that he killed
her because the spells had worn off.
Her charges of adultery and incest,
even though they were completely fake,
were also taken as proof that she was
a witch, as witches were believed to be
overly sexual and have no self-control.
And one of the reasons that our
knowledge of the real Anne Boleyn is
so unclear is that after her death her
critics did as much as they could to
erase all trace of her very existence.
Her writing was destroyed,
as were portraits of her.
Her detractors wanted to make
her as silent as the crowd at her
coronation…and they succeeded.
And as you’ll have seen, the story
of Anne Boleyn is principally told
through the people around her, the men
who tricked and conspired against her.
Clearly, in this respect there is only one
person who must bear responsibility for
the tragically short life of his former
lover and wife: Henry VIII, the king.
For some commentators, her fate was
sealed the moment he set eyes on her and
decided that he must make her his lover.
Perhaps, you could say, her story would
have been very different if she had
flat-out refused him, if she had said no.
Perhaps it would, but in that case
she would never have been queen.
Or if she had given him
a son, not a daughter.
Now, to state the obvious,
clearly she isn't at fault here.
In fact, if we are to assign fault
about the gender of the child,
it's Henry's, as the gender comes
from the father’s chromosones.
In any case, if Elizabeth had been a
boy, the fate of Anne Boleyn, and the
country, would have been very different.
Perhaps Anne would have been
able to write and control her own
legacy in a way that she wasn't
able to after her untimely death.
Given her unpopularity during her
life, the history books after her
death were not kind to Anne Boleyn.
She is, by many, remembered as an
ambitious, power-seeking young woman who
would stop at nothing to become queen,
seducing her boss’ husband and persuading
him to break with the Catholic Church.
If this is your view, perhaps it’s hard
to have a huge amount of sympathy for
her when things came crashing down.
But to others, and especially in more
recent readings of her story, she is
an innocent victim of a misogynistic
world, someone who was in the wrong
place at the wrong time, someone whose
only crime was failing to produce a male
heir, a victim of a cruel male-dominated
society and an sociopathic male ruler.
Whatever your opinion of Anne Boleyn,
perhaps her greatest legacy is in
its literal sense, the greatest
thing she left behind, was to be the
baby girl that Henry didn’t want.
That baby girl would go on to become
queen, and not just any queen.
This would be Elizabeth the First,
one of the most loved and influential
monarchs in British history.
And most importantly, this queen
would manage to survive and
thrive in this male-dominated
world, without a man by her side.
Ok then, that is it for
today’s episode on Anne Boleyn.
As a reminder, this is part one of
this three-part mini-series on queens.
Next up will be that baby girl Elizabeth
the First, the daughter of Anne Boleyn,
and then in our final part it will
be Catherine the Great of Russia.
As always I would love to know what
you thought about this episode.
What do you think of Anne Boleyn?
Ruthless power-seeking maniac
or innocent young victim?
How might her life have been different
had Elizabeth been born a boy?
Do you think she could have
refused Henry's advances?
I would love to know, so let’s
get this discussion started.
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds, by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.